---
hide:
  - toc
---

# Working with Records

!!! info "What you need to know"

	You must be able to describe, exemplify and implement arrays of records 

## Explanation

So far, we’ve used only one type of data structure to store multiple values: the array. 

Remember, an array is like a list of related variables that all share the same data type. For example, an array could store a list of numbers or a list of names, but not both.

While arrays can only hold one type of data, records allow us to store different types of data together in a single structure. For example, one record can store a name (string), an age (integer), and a status (Boolean) all in one place.

Just like in a database, records help us organize related information more efficiently.

By using records, we can keep all related data about a single person or object together in one structure, and we can use real-world names for each category (called fields) to make the data easier to understand and manage. 

==__This is especially useful because most systems we work with, like databases, organize data in this way.__==

## Record Structure

A record structure is like creating your own custom data type. 

As a programmer, you define a record with a name that represents something real, like "Student" or "Product" and specify different categories (fields) for storing information. 

Each field has a name and a specific data type (e.g., string, integer, Boolean), so the program knows how to store and handle each piece of data. 

This way, when the program creates actual records, it knows exactly what kind of information to expect in each field.


=== "Python"

    ``` python linenums="1"
	# Import the dataclass function
	from dataclasses import dataclass

	# 
	@dataclass

	class SchoolReg:
		    Name : str = ""
		    Age : int = 0
		    Reg : str = ""

	# Create an object called pupilRecord from the SchoolReg class
	pupilRecord = SchoolReg()

	# Update the pupilRecord object with Name, Age and Reg
	pupilRecord.Name = "Peter"
	pupilRecord.Age = 17
	pupilRecord.Reg = "r1"

	# Output the pupilRecord object
	print (pupilRecord.Name) 
	print (pupilRecord.Age) 
	print (pupilRecord.Reg) 
    ```
	
=== "Theory"


## Arrays of Records

### Explanation

In Python, an array of records is like a list of boxes, where each box holds important information about a person, place, or thing. 

Each "box" (record) has labelled parts for details, like a name, age, or ID number. 

For example, if we have three students, we can store their name, age, and registration number in three separate __boxes__.

These boxes are part of a record, and we can easily look inside each one to see or change the details. 

==Example==

=== "Python"

	```python linenums="1"
		from dataclasses import dataclass
		
		@dataclass
		
		# Create a class
		class SchoolReg:
			# Create variables to hold the pupil data
		    Name : str = "" 
		    Age : int = 0
		    Reg : str = ""
		
		# Create an empty list called pupilRecord to store 3 student records
		pupilRecord = [SchoolReg() for x in range (0,3)]

		# Add pupil data
		for x in range(len(pupilRecord)):
			
			pupilRecord[x].Name = str(input("Enter Name: "))
			pupilRecord[x].Age = int(input("Enter Age: "))
			pupilRecord[x].Reg = str(input("Enter Reg: "))
		
		# Print the pupil data
		for x in range(len(pupilRecord)):
		    print ("Name: " , pupilRecord[x].Name , "Age: " , pupilRecord[x].Age , "Reg: " , pupilRecord[x].Reg )
	```

=== "Reference Language"

	


