---
hide:
  - toc
---

# Feasability Studies

!!! info "What you Need to Know"

    Describe, exemplify, and implement research for:
 
    * feasibility studies:
        * economic
        * time
        * legal
        * technical
    * user surveys

Before starting a new system, it’s important to decide if it’s worth the time and money. 

This is where a __feasibility study__ comes in as it helps determine:

* Is the project realistic?
* Can it be achieved within time and budget?
* Will it meet the goals set in the __problem definition__?

A feasibility study should:

* Be low-cost and quick to complete

* Involve __no legal commitment__ to proceed

* Suggest __options or alternatives__

* End with a clear report for the client, showing:
    * Costs
    * Benefits
    * Possible solutions
    * Recommendations

!!! info "Key Points"
    
    * The feasibility study should be conducted relatively cheaply and within a fairly short time frame. 
    
    * There are no legal or contractual requirements at this stage.
    
    * The findings of the feasibility study are presented to the client in the form of a report.
    
    * This report indicates costs, benefits, alternatives and appropriate recommendations.

## Feasibility Studies

A feasibility study should look at the following five main areas:

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

-   :moneybag:{ .lg .middle } __Economic Feasibility__

    ---

    Can the organisation afford the system? 
    
    Will the benefits outweigh the costs?

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Notes](7.1.1_Economic.md)

-   :timer:{ .lg .middle } __Time Feasibility__

    ---

    Can the system be developed and installed within the required timeframe?

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Notes](7.1.2_Time.md)

-   :octicons-law-24:{ .lg .middle } __Legal Feasibility__

    ---

    Will the new system comply with laws and regulations?

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Notes](7.1.3_Legal.md)

-   :computer:{ .lg .middle } __Technical Feasibility__

    ---

    Does the organisation have the hardware, software, and skills to support the system?

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Notes](7.1.4_Technical.md)

-   :simple-limesurvey:{ .lg .middle } __User Feasibility__

    ---

    Gather feedback and opinions from users to ensure the system meets real needs.

    [:octicons-arrow-right-24: Notes](7.1.5_User_Surveys.md)

</div>

[:octicons-arrow-left-24: Analysis](7.0_index.md){ .md-button }