---
hide:
  - toc
---

# Evaluation

!!! tip "Quick Links"

    * [Fitness for Purpose](#fitness-for-purpose)
    * [Efficient use of Coding Constructs](#efficient-use-of-coding-constructs)
    * [Robustness](#robustness)
    * [Readability](#readability)
    * [Summary](#evaluation-summary)

!!! info "What you Need to Know"
      
      Describe, identify, and exemplify the evaluation of a solution in terms of:
      
      * fitness for purpose
      * efficient use of coding constructs
      * robustness
      * readability:
      
          — internal commentary
          
          — meaningful identifiers
          
          — indentation
          
          — white space
          
In your practical assignment and exam you will have to be able to evaluate a program - either yours, or one you’re given - in four categories:

* Fitness for purpose
* Efficient use of coding constructs
* Robustness
* Readability

These are very important. 

You’ll usually be asked for two of these in the assignment. 

You have to be able to give examples that fit all of these types of evaluation.

{== In the course assignment, it’s really important that you evaluate your own program accurately. If you say that your program is readable, and it isn’t, you would not get the mark. If you evaluate that your program isn’t as readable as it could be, and that’s correct, you would get the mark. In the assignment, the marks are for being honest! ==}

## Fitness for Purpose

If your program is fit for purpose, it means it does what it’s supposed to do. 

If the program meets all of the functional requirements you set out in the analysis, then it is fit for purpose - it does all the things it’s supposed to. 

If it doesn’t meet one or more, it must not be fit for purpose.

When you are doing the evaluation, use the term ==‘fit for purpose’== or ==‘not fit for purpose’== - be explicit. 

Say why it is or isn’t fit for purpose, mentioning the specific requirement e.g.:

* The program is fit for purpose, because it asks the user their age, and shows an error if they enter a negative number
  
* The program is not fit for purpose, as it is only supposed to accept percentages between 0 and 100, but it accepts values outside this range
  
Try to link your answer to exactly which requirement it is. 

Make sure that your answer links to the program you’re being asked about - don’t say ==“it doesn’t meet the requirement”==, because that could apply to any program. 

**Which requirements are specific to this program?**

!!! info "Exam Tip"
    
    The SQA will sometimes give you programs they’ve written, and ask if they are fit for purpose. 
    
    ==Don’t be too kind!== 
    
    If it isn’t fit for purpose, say so. 
    
    If you try to be polite, and say it’s err… sorta fit for purpose, when it’s not, you won’t get the mark. Be honest!

## Efficient use of Coding Constructs

Efficient use of coding constructs can seem confusing at first. 

In your exam or the assignment, the SQA tend to be really clear i.e. ==they usually give you a really bad program that’s very inefficient.==

Efficiency is about using as few lines as possible. 

!!! example

    === "Inefficent"
    
        ``` python linenums="1"      
        print("Hello. My name is Bob.")
        print("Hello. My name is Bob.")
        print("Hello. My name is Bob.")
        print("Hello. My name is Bob.")
        print("Hello. My name is Bob.")
        ```
    
    === "Efficent"
    
        ``` python linenums="1"      
        for loop in range(0, 5):
            print("Hello. My name is Bob.")
        ```
The program on the left isn’t efficient. It says the same thing over and over again - something that could be done with a loop. 

The program on the right shows the same message, but it loops 5 times.

The program on the right does the same thing much more efficiently because it uses fewer lines of code to achieve the same goal. 

You’ll get much better at spotting these as you become experienced with Python. 

## Robustness

A robust program doesn’t crash when the user enters exceptional data. 

!!! example

    > A program is created to take the age of a person. 
    
    If the user enters a negative number (**no one has a negative age!**) the program shouldn’t just crash - it should show an error message and ask them to enter it again.
    

You can test robustness using exceptional test data i.e. ==how does the program behave if you enter exceptional data? If it crashes, the program isn’t robust.== 

If it can cope with errors (e.g. by asking them nicely to enter it again), it is robust, and you can say this in your evaluation.

## Readability

Readability is about making your program easy for you, or other programmers after you, to read and understand. 

There are four ways that you can make your code readable, and you are expected to do these in your work. 

The coursework assignment includes marks for readable code using these four methods.

### Internal Commentary

Your code should contain internal commentary. 

Comments are notes that you leave to yourself, or other programmers, to explain what’s going on. 

The computer ignores them when translating the program.

I always use internal commentary in the examples I give you, and you’re expected to do the same. 

!!! example "Example of Internal Commentary in Python"

    ``` python linenums="1"      
    # This is an internal comment
    # The computer ignores these lines
    ```
### Meaningful identifiers

Sometimes also called meaningful variable names. 

When you look at your program, do the variable names help you to understand it? If so, you’ve probably used meaningful names.

In short, don’t call your variables things like x or k. 

Give them more suitable names like age, password, multiplier - whatever! Although the computer ignores the names of variables, you gain marks for using names that make the program easier for humans to understand.

!!! example

    === "Not Meaningful"
    
        ``` python linenums="1"      
        p = input(“What is your age?”)
        = input(“What is your name?”)
    
        print(“Hello”, x)
        print(“You are”, p, “years old.”)
        ```
    
    === "Meaningful"
    
        ``` python linenums="1"      
        age = input(“What is your age?”)
        name = input(“What is your name?”)
    
        print(“Hello”, name)
        print(“You are”, age, “years old.”)
        ```
The program on the left is shorter, but the programmer is more likely to make a mistake and mix up x and p.

This becomes even worse in longer programs. Save yourself the trouble by using meaningful variable names.

### Indentation

Indentation means that code is “tabbed in” from the side, so that it’s clear what loops or if statements it belongs to. 

This is especially true in Python, because in fact, code has to be indented to work properly.

!!! example

    === "Not Indented"
    
        ``` python linenums="1"      
        if age >= 17:
        print(“You can learn to drive”)
        else:
        print(“You can’t learn yet...")
        ```
    
    === "Indented"
    
        ``` python linenums="1"      
        if age >= 17:
            print(“You can learn to drive”)
        else:
            print(“You can’t learn yet...")
        ```
In the program on the right, it’s easier to see that the two print lines belong to the if and else.

==You already do this in Python, just remember to talk about it in your evaluation!==

### Whitespace

Whitespace is about leaving blank lines between pieces of code. This spaces things out and makes it a little easier to see what belongs together. 

I always leave whitespace in the practical examples I give you - blank lines so that related pieces of code are grouped together. 

I’ve done it with paragraphs in these lesson notes!

Real programs often run into thousands of lines of code. 

==Think how hard those would be to read if the lines were all jammed together with no blank spaces.==

## Evaluation Summary

Make sure that you can evaluate your program in the four areas - fitness for purpose, robustness, readability and efficiency of coding constructs. You’ll normally be given the names, but you have to recall what they mean.

For example, the coursework assignment usually contains a section laid out like this:

Evaluate your program in terms of:

`Fitness for purpose (1 mark)` - My program is fit for purpose because .......

`Robustness (1 mark)` - My program is not robust, because if the user enters a string instead of a number the program crashes (an execution error).

`Readability (2 marks)` - My program is readable because I used meaningful variable names like “score” instead of just calling it num1, num2, etc.  However, I could have made it more readable if I had used internal commentary.

You are expected to make points in each box - this can be a good way to gain marks in the programming part of the assignment, so long as you prepare! 

==Be honest - you get more marks for constructive criticism than saying the program does something, when it doesn’t.==